<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<!--
Copyright Martin Holmes. 
Dual-licensed under CC-by and BSD2 licences 
$Date: 2014-10-29 14:22:27 -0700 (Wed, 29 Oct 2014) $
$Id: codesharing_protocol.xhtml 35 2014-10-29 21:22:27Z martindholmes $
-->
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
    <head>
      <meta charset="utf-8" />
        <title>The CodeSharing Protocol for TEI Markup, Version 1.0.</title>
      
      <style type="text/css" media="all">

        body{
          font-family: georgia, serif;
          margin: 2em 10%;
          max-width: 50em;
        }

/* Counters for sections and subsections. */
        body{
          counter-reset: section;
        }
        
        body&gt;section{
           counter-reset: subsection;
          counter-increment: section;
        }
        
        h2:before{
          content: counter(section) "." counter(subsection) " ";
        }
        
        section&gt;section{
          counter-increment: subsection;
        }
        
        h3:before{
          content: counter(section) "." counter(subsection) " ";
        }
        
        nav{
          counter-reset: navsection;
        }
        nav&gt;ul&gt;li{
          counter-increment: navsection;
          counter-reset: navsubsection;
        }
        nav&gt;ul&gt;li&gt;ul&gt;li{
          counter-increment: navsubsection;
        }
        nav a:before{
          content: counter(navsection) "." counter(navsubsection) " ";
        }
       
        
        
/* Regular styles. */
        section{
          margin-top: 1em;
          margin-left: 1em;
        }

        li, dt{
          margin-top: 0.5em;
        }
        
        code{
          font-family: monospace;
          font-weight: bold;
          display: inline;
        }

        code.paramName{
          color: #990000;
        }
        
        code.paramValue{
          color: #009900;
        }
        
        code.xmlId{
          color: #000099;
        }
        
        code.requiredOptional{
          color: #990099;
        }
        
        code.requiredOptional:before{
          content: "(";
        }
        
        code.requiredOptional:after{
          content: ")";
        }
        
        blockquote{
          padding: 0.5em;
          background-color: #d0d0d0;
        }
        
      </style>
      
      <script type="text/ecmascript">
        
        //<![CDATA[

        <!--
        
        //Build a page menu automatically, so we don't have to maintain it.
        
        function buildNav(){
          var body=document.getElementsByTagName('body')[0];
          var nav=document.createElement('nav');
          createSectionList(body, nav);
          var firstSection = body.getElementsByTagName('section')[0];
          body.insertBefore(nav, firstSection);
        }
        
        function createSectionList(rootEl, appendTo){
          var ul=document.createElement('ul');
          var children = rootEl.childNodes;
          var sectionNum = 0;
          for (var i=0; i<children.length; i++){
            if (children[i].tagName && children[i].tagName.toUpperCase() == 'SECTION'){
              sectionNum++;
              var li = document.createElement('li');
              var a = document.createElement('a');
              a.setAttribute('href', '#'+children[i].getAttribute('id'));
              var t = document.createTextNode(children[i].getElementsByTagName('header')[0].textContent);
              a.appendChild(t);
              li.appendChild(a);
              ul.appendChild(li);
              if (children[i].getElementsByTagName('section').length > 0){
                createSectionList(children[i], li);
              }
            }
          }
          appendTo.appendChild(ul);
        }
        
        
        
        //-->

        //]]>

      </script>
      
    </head>
    <body onload="buildNav()">
        <h1>The CodeSharing Protocol for TEI Markup</h1>
        <h1>Version 1.0</h1>
        <h4>Martin Holmes, University of Victoria, 2013.</h4>
        <p>This document describes a protocol through which any repository containing documents
            encoded in TEI XML (or any other schema) may make examples of XML encoding available to
            any harvesting tool, or, through a form-based interface, to anyone interested in
            examining encoding practises. I recently presented the project at the TEI 2014 Conference in
            Evanston (<a href="http://tei.northwestern.edu/files/2014/10/mholmes_codesharing-1ybmalo.pdf">PDF of paper</a>),
          and the project itself is housed on SourceForge at 
          <a href="https://sourceforge.net/projects/codesharing/">https://sourceforge.net/projects/codesharing/</a>.
        </p>
      
      <p>This is not a formal specification, so it eschews the customary definitions of modal verbs and key adjectives. </p>
        <section id="definitions">
            <header>
                <h2>Definitions</h2>
            </header>
            <dl>
                <dt>
                    <dfn>Repository</dfn>
                </dt>
                <dd>Any collection of XML-encoded documents, stored in an XML database, a
                    conventional database, or on a file system.</dd>
              
              <dt>
                    <dfn>Service</dfn>
                </dt>
              <dd>A server responding on a particular URL to requests formatted according to the CodeSharing 
              protocol, returning results in accordance with the description below.</dd>
              

                <dt>
                    <dfn>Harvester</dfn>
                </dt>
                <dd>An automated application which queries a system implementing the CodeSharing API
                    to retrieve lists of XML elements or other information provided through the
                    API.</dd>

                <dt>
                    <dfn>User</dfn>
                </dt>
                <dd>A non-automated client who uses a human-friendly interface based on the
                    CodeSharing API to retrieve examples of encoding.</dd>
            </dl>
        </section>
        <section id="useCases">
            <header>
                <h2>Use cases</h2>
            </header>
            <p>There are currently three primary use-cases for an implementation of this protocol.</p>
          <section id="humanUsers">
            <header>
                    <h3>Easy access to example encodings for project workers</h3>
                </header>
            <p>Large-scale encoding projects are increasingly common in the digital humanities. It is not 
            unusual for five or six encoders to be working simultaneously on a document collection, 
            with different levels of skills and experience. Good documentation and training is essential, 
            but many people learn more effectively by looking at examples. A human-friendly front-end
            for a CodeSharing service, such as the HTML-form-based implementation included in the current 
            codebase, can be a very useful tool for working encoders, enabling them to find examples 
            of the current usage of tags and attributes on which to base their encoding. </p>
          </section>
          
          <section id="mechanicalHarvesters">
            <header>
                    <h3>Statistical and survey work across projects</h3>
                </header>
            <p>Organizations with a strong investment in TEI encoding, including the TEI itself, will be 
            interested in the possibility of querying multiple collections of TEI documents for information
            about the use of specific tags and attributes. For instance, the TEI Council, in its role as 
            maintainer and updater of the Guidelines, often needs to know how a particular element 
            is being used "in the wild" when considering how or whether to make a change to its 
            definition or values.</p>
          </section>
          
          <section id="guidelinesExamples">
            <header>
                    <h3>A source of examples for the TEI Guidelines</h3>
                </header>
            <p>TEI Council members working on improving and expanding the TEI Guidelines 
            are often in search of realistic uses of elements and attributes to insert as examples
            into the Guidelines text and specifications. Repositories implementing a CodeSharing 
            service would provide easily accessible sources for such examples.</p>
          </section>
        </section>
      
      <section id="httpRequests">
        <header>
                <h2>HTTP requests</h2>
            </header>
        <p>CodeSharing requests are HTTP requests, submitted using the HTTP GET or POST methods. Since requests
        cannot by the nature of the CodeSharing protocol be very long, it is unlikely that normal length-limits for GET 
        will be exceeded, so it is more practical to use GET than POST because GET requests can easily be bookmarked.</p>
        
        <p>There is a single base URL for all requests. This base URL does not need to be included in any of the responses
          to requests, since it is impossible for the requester to retrieve a response without already knowing the URL; the 
          base URL must be advertised to potential users and harvesters using other means, such as links on the project 
          website.</p>
        
        <p>In what follows, we will use the example base URL <code>http://mapoflondon.uvic.ca/codesharing(.xml|.htm)</code>, 
        which is in fact a working prototype.</p>
        
        <p>Requests made to the base URL must also include a list of keyword arguments in the form of <code class="paramName">key</code>
                <code>=</code>
                <code class="paramValue">value</code> pairs. 
        Keys and values are described below. Responses to requests on the base URL take the form of a TEI XML document, whose 
        parameters are described below.</p>
        
        <p>In addition to the base URL for XML responses, a repository may also advertise a second URL on which requests can be made,
        and which will provide responses in the form of an HTML page with output formatted for easy reading. Such an HTML page may 
        also include an HTML form, enabling a user to query the server more easily. An example of such an interface is available at 
          <a href="http://mapoflondon.uvic.ca/codesharing.htm">http://mapoflondon.uvic.ca/codesharing.htm</a>. The <code class="paramName">key</code>
                <code>=</code>
                <code class="paramValue">value</code> 
        parameters are identical when querying the XML or HTML URLs of a repository.</p>
      </section>
      
      <section id="requestParameters">
        <header>
                <h2>Request parameters</h2>
            </header>
        
        <p>The following is a list of the keys and values that may be included in the request, and a brief description of 
        the response the server should provide to each. The exact format of the response is treated in a later section.</p>
        
        <section id="verbParameter">
          <header>
                    <h3>Key: <code class="paramName">verb</code>
                    </h3>
                </header>
          <p>The <code class="paramName">verb</code> key is the primary component of the request. It can take the following values:</p>
          <ul>
            <li>
                        <code class="paramValue">identify</code>: This causes the service to provide identification information about itself.</li>
            <li>
                        <code class="paramValue">listElements</code>: The service responds with a list of all the local names of elements which are in the namespace 
              supplied in the <code class="paramValue">namespace</code> parameter (described below). Where the <code class="paramName">namespace</code> parameter is 
              empty, the service provides a list of elements which are in the empty namespace. Where the <code class="paramName">namespace</code> parameter 
            is not supplied, the service may choose to respond based on a default namespace (such as the TEI namespace, as our example
            implementation does), or return no elements at all.</li>
            <li>
                        <code class="paramValue">listAttributes</code>: The service responds with a list of local attribute names. The same rules with regard to namespaces 
              apply as in the case of <code class="paramValue">listElements</code>, but with one important exception. According to the XML specification, unprefixed 
              attributes do not inherit the namespace of their parent elements. This means that, for instance, the TEI <code>@corresp</code> attribute, 
              even when it appears on a <code>&lt;name&gt;</code> element in the TEI namespace, is not itself in the TEI namespace. This is 
            somewhat counter-intuitive for most people, and can lead to confusion. Therefore, in the CodeSharing protocol, a request with a 
            query-string like this:
            
              <blockquote>
                            <code>?verb=listAttributes&amp;namespace=namespace=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.tei-c.org%2Fns%2F1.0</code>
                        </blockquote>
            
            (<q>list attributes in the TEI namespace</q>) will result in a list which is composed of the names of:
            
            <ol>
              <li>all attributes which are in the TEI namespace (there are not normally any of these)</li>
              <li>all unprefixed attributes which are children of elements in the TEI namespace (what we normally think of as <q>TEI attributes</q>).</li>
            </ol>
            </li>
            <li>
                        <code class="paramValue">listDocumentTypes</code>: The service responds with a list of all the document types in the repository. How
              document types are identified is entirely the responsibility of the service and the project whose documents it serves. The example
              implementation is based on a project which uses the TEI <code>&lt;taxonomy&gt; and &lt;category&gt;</code> elements as a mechanism 
              for specifying document types, along with <code>&lt;catRef&gt;</code> elements for assigning them to documents, but any
              TEI-compliant method of categorizing texts may be used. The list of document types should be in the form of human-readable 
              identifiers, with each identifier wrapped in a <code>&lt;name&gt;</code> element; passing one of these identifiers back to the service 
              as the value of the <code class="paramName">documentType</code> parameter will result in the filtering of examples according to the 
              selected document type.
            </li>
            <li>
                        <code class="paramValue">listNamespaces</code>: The service responds with a list of all the namespaces used in the repository.</li>
            <li>
                        <code class="paramValue">getExamples</code>: This causes the service to retrieve a list of examples of encoding, based on the values 
            of other key/value pairs in the request, and return them. If no other parameters are supplied, then no examples
            are returned.</li>
          </ul>
          
          <p>Note that <code class="paramValue">identify</code> is the default value for this key, and if the key is absent, or has no 
            value, <code class="paramValue">identify</code> is assumed. This means that <em>a request to the base URL with no parameters 
              at all is the same as a request with <code class="paramName">verb</code>
                        <code>=</code>
                        <code class="paramValue">identify</code>
                    </em>.</p>
      </section>
        
        <!--<section id="documentTypeParameter">
          <header><h3>Key: <code class="paramName">documentType</code></h3></header>
          
          <p>The value of this parameter is an arbitrary string which the service can associate with a subset of documents. </p>
          
        </section>-->
        
        <section id="elementNameParameter">
          <header>
                    <h3>Key: <code class="paramName">elementName</code>
                    </h3>
                </header>
          <p>The value of this parameter is the local name of an XML element. Where <code class="paramName">verb</code>
                    <code>=</code>
                    <code class="paramValue">getExamples</code>, the service responds 
            with a set of examples of the element requested in the namespace which is specified. For example, this request:</p>
          
          <blockquote>
                    <code>?verb=getExamples&amp;elementName=div&amp;namespace=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.tei-c.org%2Fns%2F1.0</code>
                </blockquote>
          
          <p>will retrieve a set of examples of the TEI <code>&lt;div&gt;</code> element, if it exists in documents in the repository.</p>
        </section>
        
        <section id="attributeNameParameter">
          <header>
                    <h3>Key: <code class="paramName">attributeName</code>
                    </h3>
                </header>
          <p>The value of this parameter is the local name of an XML attribute. Where <code class="paramName">verb</code>
                    <code>=</code>
                    <code class="paramValue">getExamples</code>, the service responds 
            with a set of examples of the attribute requested in the namespace which is specified. Attributes are always returned in the 
            context of their parent elements. For example, this request:</p>
          
          <blockquote>
                    <code>verb=getExamples&amp;attributeName=ref&amp;namespace=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.tei-c.org%2Fns%2F1.0</code>
                </blockquote>
          
          <p>will retrieve a set of examples of elements which bear the TEI <code>@ref</code> attribute, if it exists in documents in the repository. <em>Note:
            the same conditions regarding namespaces apply to this key as to the <code class="paramName">verb</code>
                        <code>=</code>
                        <code class="paramValue">listAttributes</code> parameter discussed above.</em> </p>
          
          <p>When this parameter is combined with the <code class="paramName">elementName</code> parameter, only attributes found in the context of the named 
          element will be returned. For instance, this request:</p>
          
          <blockquote>
                    <code>?verb=getExamples&amp;elementName=hi&amp;attributeName=rend&amp;namespace=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.tei-c.org%2Fns%2F1.0</code>
                </blockquote>
          
          <p>will retrieve only TEI <code>&lt;hi&gt;</code> elements which bear the attribute <code>@rend</code>.</p>
        </section>
        
        <section id="attributeValueParameter">
          <header>
                    <h3>Key: <code class="paramName">attributeValue</code>
                    </h3>
                </header>
          <p>The value of this parameter is the value of an XML attribute. Where <code class="paramName">verb</code>
                    <code>=</code>
                    <code class="paramValue">getExamples</code>, and an <code class="paramName">attributeName</code> parameter is provided, the service responds 
            with a set of examples of the attribute with the value requested in the namespace which is specified. Attributes are always returned in the 
            context of their parent elements. For example, this request:</p>
          
          <blockquote>
                    <code>verb=getExamples&amp;attributeName=type&amp;attributeValue=simple&amp;namespace=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.tei-c.org%2Fns%2F1.0</code>
                </blockquote>
          
          <p>will retrieve a set of examples of elements which bear the TEI <code>@type</code> attribute set to the value <q>simple</q>, if it exists in documents in the repository. </p>
          
          <p>When the two attribute parameters are combined with the <code class="paramName">elementName</code> parameter, only attributes found in the context of the named 
            element will be returned. For instance, this request:</p>
          
          <blockquote>
                    <code>?verb=getExamples&amp;elementName=list&amp;attributeName=type&amp;attributeValue=simple&amp;namespace=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.tei-c.org%2Fns%2F1.0</code>
                </blockquote>
          
          <p>will retrieve only TEI <code>&lt;list&gt;</code> elements whose <code>@type</code> attribute has the value <q>simple</q>.</p>
        </section>
        
        <section id="documentTypeParameter">
          <header>
                    <h3>Key: <code class="paramName">documentType</code>
                    </h3>
                </header>
          <p>The value of this parameter is a string token. If this parameter is supplied, then the results of other requests will be filtered such that 
            only elements and attributes from documents which belong to the specified document type are returned. A harvester or human user may 
            discover what <code class="paramName">documentType</code> values are available in the collection by submitting a request with 
            <code class="paramName">verb</code>
                    <code>=</code>
                    <code class="paramValue">listDocumentTypes</code>. The 
            <code class="paramName">documentType</code> parameter is an optional feature of the API, and services working with collections which 
            do not have document type categories may choose not to provide it.
          </p>
        </section>
        
        <section id="namespaceParameter">
          <header>
                    <h3>Key: <code class="paramName">namespace</code>
                    </h3>
                </header>
      <p>The value of this parameter is a namespace URL. In the case of a GET request, note that certain characters in the URL (such as colons and 
        slashes) will be escaped using hexadecimal representations in order to comply with <a href="http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2396.txt">RFC 2396</a>. 
        The <code class="paramName">namespace</code> parameter provides the namespace context within which other requests operate, as described above.
      </p>
        </section>
        
        <section id="wrappedParameter">
          <header>
                    <h3>Key: <code class="paramName">wrapped</code>
                    </h3>
                </header>
          
          <p>The key <code class="paramName">wrapped</code> may have two values:</p>
          
          <ul>
            <li>
                        <code class="paramValue">true</code>
                    </li>
            <li>
                        <code class="paramValue">false</code> (the default)</li>
          </ul>
          
          <p>If <code class="paramName">wrapped</code>
                    <code>=</code>
                    <code class="paramValue">true</code>, the elements found by the service in response to the rest of the request will be returned in the 
          context of their parent element. For example, this request:</p>
          
          <blockquote>
                    <code>?verb=getExamples&amp;elementName=hi&amp;wrapped=true&amp;namespace=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.tei-c.org%2Fns%2F1.0</code>
                </blockquote>
          
          <p>would result in a list of examples of elements which contain the TEI <code>&lt;hi&gt;</code> element 
            (such as <code>&lt;p&gt;</code>). This is particularly useful for learning about the typical usage of an 
          element and the contexts in which it is found.</p>
          
        </section>
        
        <section id="maxItemsPerPageParameter">
          <header>
                    <h3>Key: <code class="paramName">maxItemsPerPage</code>
                    </h3>
                </header>
          <p>The value of this key is a positive integer. This enables a harvester to specify the maximum number of 
          items which it is prepared to process in one operation. <em>However, it is only a request.</em> The service 
          is free to impose its own maximum number of items per page on its responses, and this may override the 
          number requested in this parameter. This is important, because it would be relatively easy to overwhelm a server
          providing CodeSharing services for a large repository by requesting a response containing thousands of elements.</p>
          
          <p>Note: this parameter works in conjunction with the <a href="#paging">paging functionality</a> described below.</p>
          
        </section>
        
      </section>
      
      <section id="httpResponses">
        <header>
                <h2>HTTP responses</h2>
            </header>
        
        <p>Responses to requests on the base URL of the service (XML responses) must conform with the following guidelines:</p>
        
        <ul>
          <li>They must be served with either the TEI or one of the generic XML mime types:
          <ul>
            <li>
                            <code>application/tei+xml</code>
                        </li>
            <li>
                            <code>application/xml</code>
                        </li>
            <li>
                            <code>text/xml</code>
                        </li>
          </ul>
          </li>
          <li>The response must be provided in the form of a standard TEI XML file which validates against the current version of the 
            "tei_all" schema available on the TEI website at <a href="http://www.tei-c.org/release/xml/tei/custom/schema/relaxng/tei_all.rng">http://www.tei-c.org/release/xml/tei/custom/schema/relaxng/tei_all.rng</a>.</li>
          <li>The <code>&lt;front&gt;</code> element of the response must include key pieces of information in the form of 
            elements with the <code>@xml:id</code> attributes specified below in <a href="#dataPoints">Data points</a>. </li>
            <li>The <code>&lt;body&gt;</code> element of the response must include the results of the query, in the format described 
              below in <a href="#resultFormat">Format of results</a>.</li>
        </ul>
          
          
        <p>There are no rules or guidelines regarding the format of a response on to the HTML URL of a CodeSharing service; any 
          human-readable page which includes the response information in some format is acceptable.</p>
          
          <section id="dataPoints">
            <header>
                    <h3>Data points</h3>
                </header>
            <p>The following data points are returned in the <code>&lt;front&gt;</code> element of the TEI response file. Each 
            data point is identified by an <code>@xml:id</code> attribute beginning with "cs_" (for "CodeSharing"). The data 
            itself comprises the text content of the element. There is no constraint on what type of element should be used, 
            as long as it has the correct <code>@xml:id</code>. Some data is required, and some is optional. Many of these data 
            points simply echo back input parameters. </p>
            
          <h4>Required data items</h4>
          <ul>
            <li>
                        <code class="xmlId">cs_project</code> <code class="requiredOptional">required</code> A string identifying the project or repository 
              whose markup can be queried through the service.</li>
            <li>
                        <code class="xmlId">cs_verb</code> <code class="requiredOptional">required</code> The value of the <code class="paramName">verb</code> 
              parameter which has been passed in as part of the query.</li>
            <li>
                        <code class="xmlId">cs_namespace</code> <code class="requiredOptional">required</code> The value of the <code class="paramName">namespace</code> 
              parameter which has been passed in as part of the query.</li>
            <li>
                        <code class="xmlId">cs_elementName</code> <code class="requiredOptional">required</code> The value of the <code class="paramName">elementName</code> 
              parameter which has been passed in as part of the query.</li>
            <li>
                        <code class="xmlId">cs_attributeName</code> <code class="requiredOptional">required</code> The value of the <code class="paramName">attributeName</code> 
              parameter which has been passed in as part of the query.</li>
            <li>
                        <code class="xmlId">cs_wrapped</code> <code class="requiredOptional">required</code> The value of the <code class="paramName">wrapped</code> 
              parameter which has been passed in as part of the query.</li>
            <li>
                        <code class="xmlId">cs_totalInstances</code> <code class="requiredOptional">required</code> The total number of results from the query (of which a subset
              appears in the response page, based on the effective maximum number per page).</li>
            <li>
                        <code class="xmlId">cs_nextUrl</code> <code class="requiredOptional">required</code> An absolute or relative URL which leads to the next page of 
              results, in the case where there are more results from the query than can fit on one page (based on the <code class="paramName">maxItemsPerPage</code>
              value submitted in the query, which may be overridden by the server's own limits).</li>
          </ul>
          
          <h4>Optional data items</h4>
            <ul>
              <li>
                        <code class="xmlId">cs_documentType</code> <code class="requiredOptional">optional</code> The value of the 
                <code class="paramName">documentType</code> parameter.</li>
              <li>
                        <code class="xmlId">cs_defaultMaxItemsPerPage</code> <code class="requiredOptional">optional</code> The default paging maximum used by the server
                where no value is supplied in the <code class="paramName">maxItemsPerPage</code> parameter.</li>
              <li>
                        <code class="xmlId">cs_absoluteMaxItemsPerPage</code> <code class="requiredOptional">optional</code> The server's internal absolute limit on the number 
                of results it is prepared to supply in a single page (this overrides the <code class="paramName">maxItemsPerPage</code> parameter).</li>
              <li>
                        <code class="xmlId">cs_maxItemsPerPage</code> <code class="requiredOptional">optional</code> The value of the <code class="paramName">maxItemsPerPage</code> parameter.</li>
              <li>
                        <code class="xmlId">cs_totalInstances</code> <code class="requiredOptional">optional</code> The total number of results from the query (of which a subset
                appears in the response page, based on the effective maximum number per page).</li>
              <li>
                        <code class="xmlId">cs_from</code> <code class="requiredOptional">optional</code> Where there are more results than will fit on one page, 
                this is the number of the first result in the current page, as part of the total number of results. For example, if there are 100 results of the 
                query, and a maximum number per page of 20, then the first page of results will have <code class="xmlId">cs_from</code>
                        <code>=1</code>,
                the second will have <code class="xmlId">cs_from</code>
                        <code>=21</code>, and so on.</li>
              <li>
                        <code class="xmlId">cs_next</code> <code class="requiredOptional">optional</code> Where there are more results than will fit on one page, 
                this is the number of the first result in the following page, as part of the total number of results. For example, if there are 100 results of the 
                query, and a maximum number per page of 20, then the first page of results will have <code class="xmlId">cs_next</code>
                        <code>=21</code>,
                the second will have <code class="xmlId">cs_from</code>
                        <code>=41</code>, and so on.</li>
              <li>
                        <code class="xmlId">cs_currParams</code> <code class="requiredOptional">optional</code> This is a complete copy of the query which 
              was submitted to get these results, in the form of the query string of a GET URL (everything following the question mark). For example:
                 <blockquote>
                            <code>verb=getExamples&amp;elementName=hi&amp;wrapped=false&amp;attributeName=&amp;namespace=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.tei-c.org%2Fns%2F1.0&amp;maxItemsPerPage=30&amp;from=1</code>
                        </blockquote>
                
                This may be useful in cases where a harvester is collecting and storing results; it provides a simple way to run the same query again at a later date.
              </li>
              
              <li>
                        <code class="xmlId">cs_nextParams</code> <code class="requiredOptional">optional</code> In the case of a multi-page result set, this is a 
                complete copy of the query which would be submitted to get the next page of results, in the form of the query string of a GET URL 
                (everything following the question mark).</li>
              
              <li>
                        <code class="xmlId">cs_prevParams</code> <code class="requiredOptional">optional</code> In the case of a multi-page result set, this is a 
                complete copy of the query which would be submitted to get the previous page of results, in the form of the query string of a GET URL 
                (everything following the question mark).</li>
              
              <li>
                        <code class="xmlId">cs_url</code> <code class="requiredOptional">optional</code> An absolute or relative URL to the base of the codesharing 
                service.</li>
              
              <li>
                        <code class="xmlId">cs_prevUrl</code> <code class="requiredOptional">optional</code> An absolute or relative URL to the base of the codesharing 
                service, combined with the parameters required to retrieve the previous page of results.</li>
            </ul>
</section>
        
        <section id="resultFormat">
          <header>
                    <h3>Format of results</h3>
                </header>
          
          <p>Results are always returned in the <code>&lt;body&gt;</code> of the TEI XML result document. They are formatted as follows:</p>
          
          <ul>
            <li>A <strong>list of element names</strong> (the result of a <code class="paramName">verb</code>
                        <code>=</code>
                        <code class="paramValue">listElements</code> request) is returned using the <code>&lt;list&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;item&gt;</code> and <code>&lt;gi&gt;</code>
            elements, as in this example:
            <pre>
      &lt;list&gt;
        &lt;item&gt;
            &lt;gi&gt;author&lt;/gi&gt;
        &lt;/item&gt;
        &lt;item&gt;
            &lt;gi&gt;availability&lt;/gi&gt;
        &lt;/item&gt;
        &lt;item&gt;
            &lt;gi&gt;back&lt;/gi&gt;
        &lt;/item&gt;
        [...]
      &lt;/list&gt;
            </pre>
            </li>
            
            <li>A <strong>list of attribute names</strong> (the result of a <code class="paramName">verb</code>
                        <code>=</code>
                        <code class="paramValue">listAttributes</code> request) is returned using the <code>&lt;list&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;item&gt;</code> and <code>&lt;att&gt;</code>
              elements, as in this example:
              <pre>
      &lt;list&gt;
        &lt;item&gt;
            &lt;att&gt;calendar&lt;/att&gt;
        &lt;/item&gt;
        &lt;item&gt;
            &lt;att&gt;cert&lt;/att&gt;
        &lt;/item&gt;
        &lt;item&gt;
            &lt;att&gt;code&lt;/att&gt;
        &lt;/item&gt;
        [...]
      &lt;/list&gt;
            </pre>
            </li>
            
            <li>A <strong>list of document types</strong> (the result of a <code class="paramName">verb</code>
                        <code>=</code>
                        <code class="paramValue">listDocumentTypes</code> request) is returned using the <code>&lt;list&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;item&gt;</code> and <code>&lt;name&gt;</code>
              elements. Supplementary information may be supplied following the <code>&lt;name&gt;</code> elements, as in this example:
              <pre>
      &lt;list&gt;
        &lt;item&gt;
            &lt;name&gt;mdtBornDigital&lt;/name&gt; : Born-digital documents created as part of this project, and not based on any pre-existing source text. 
        &lt;/item&gt;
        &lt;item&gt;
            &lt;name&gt;mdtCritical&lt;/name&gt; : Critical apparatus, introductions and textual notes relating to digital editions of primary texts. 
        &lt;/item&gt;
        &lt;item&gt;
            &lt;name&gt;mdtDatabase&lt;/name&gt; : Database-like documents containing a sequence of records, such as a personography.  
        &lt;/item&gt;
        [...]
      &lt;/list&gt;
            </pre>
            </li>
            
            <li>A <strong>list of namespace URIs</strong> (the result of a <code class="paramName">verb</code>
                        <code>=</code>
                        <code class="paramValue">listNamespaces</code> request) is returned using the <code>&lt;list&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;item&gt;</code> and <code>&lt;ptr&gt;</code>
              elements, as in this example:
              <pre>
      &lt;list&gt;
        &lt;item&gt;[empty namespace]&lt;/item&gt;
        &lt;item&gt;
            &lt;ptr target="http://purl.oclc.org/dsdl/schematron"/&gt;
        &lt;/item&gt;
        &lt;item&gt;
            &lt;ptr target="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"/&gt;
        &lt;/item&gt;
        &lt;item&gt;
            &lt;ptr target="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"/&gt;
        &lt;/item&gt;
        [...]
      &lt;/list&gt;
            </pre>
              Note the special case of the empty namespace.
            </li>
            
            <li>A <strong>list of elements</strong> (the result of a <code class="paramName">verb</code>
                        <code>=</code>
                        <code class="paramValue">getExamples</code> request) is returned in a <code>&lt;div&gt;</code> element containing
            a sequence of <code>&lt;egXML&gt;</code> elements, as in this example:
            
            <pre>
      &lt;div&gt;
        &lt;egXML xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/Examples"&gt;
            &lt;head&gt;Bibliographies&lt;/head&gt;
        &lt;/egXML&gt;
        &lt;egXML xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/Examples"&gt;
            &lt;head&gt;Fun Resources&lt;/head&gt;
        &lt;/egXML&gt;
        &lt;egXML xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/Examples"&gt;
            &lt;head&gt;Introduction&lt;/head&gt;
        &lt;/egXML&gt;
        [...]
      &lt;/div&gt;
            </pre>
            
            Note that the <code>&lt;egXML&gt;</code> element is not in the regular TEI namespace; it is in the 
              TEI Examples namespace, and that namespace is inherited by the child elements. The <code>&lt;egXML&gt;</code>
              element may also carry the <code>@source</code> attribute, with an identifier for the document from which 
              the example comes; this is optional, and its functionality (how its path is designated, etc.) is left to the 
              implementation.
            
            </li>
            
          </ul>
        </section>

        
      </section>
      
      <section id="paging">
        <header>
                <h2>Paging of results</h2>
        </header>
        
        <p>As mentioned above, where there are more results than can be fit on one page, the result document 
        will always contain an element with the <code>@xml:id</code> <code class="xmlId">cs_nextUrl</code>, so
        that the user or harvester can retrieve a series of result pages until the entire result set has been 
        gathered, if required. Assuming that all the parameters for the subsequent request can be encoded in the
        <code class="xmlId">cs_nextUrl</code> value, the server need not maintain an session record and the 
        entire API can function in a stateless manner, as does the sample XQuery implementation running on the 
        <a href="http://mapoflondon.uvic.ca/codesharing">Map of Early Modern London</a> website. However, if it 
          suits the implementer to maintain state on the server, to avoid (for instance) having to do expensive 
        queries multiple times, then there is nothing to prevent this.</p>
        
        <p>Nevertheless, since the protocol is intended to function in a stateless manner, it is possible that 
        the underlying data may change between requests in a series. If, for instance, a document is deleted 
        between the first and second requests for examples of an element, and the number of such examples is 
        thereby reduced, the second page of results may not be what was expected; in fact in may be empty. 
        This is not regarded as problematic; there is no requirement that a series of result pages, when 
        amalgamated, need precisely reflect a particular coherent state of the repository.</p>
        
      </section>
      
      <section id="examples">
        <header>
                <h2>Examples</h2>
            </header>
        <p>This section provides several example requests along with constructed URLs for them,
          linked to the example implementation on the 
          <a href="http://mapoflondon.uvic.ca/codesharing">Map of Early Modern London</a> website. Links
          are provided both to the base URL <code>http://mapoflondon.uvic.ca/codesharing</code> 
          (resulting in an XML response), and the HTML front-end of the 
          service <code>http://mapoflondon.uvic.ca/codesharing</code>, which provides a more 
          human-readable rendering created by transforming the XML response 
        to XHTML5 using XSLT.</p>
        
        <ol>
          <li>
                    <strong>List all TEI elements in the repository:</strong>
          <pre>
    verb=listElements
    namespace=http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0</pre>
            <ul>
              <li>
                            <a href="http://mapoflondon.uvic.ca/codesharing?verb=listElements&amp;namespace=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.tei-c.org%2Fns%2F1.0">link (XML)</a>
                        </li>
              <li>
                            <a href="http://mapoflondon.uvic.ca/codesharing.htm?verb=listElements&amp;namespace=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.tei-c.org%2Fns%2F1.0">link (HTML)</a>
                        </li>
            </ul>
          </li>
          <li>
                    <strong>Get examples of TEI <code>&lt;head&gt;</code> elements in the repository:</strong>
            <pre>
    verb=getExamples
    elementName=head
    namespace=http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0</pre>
            <ul>
              <li>
                            <a href="http://mapoflondon.uvic.ca/codesharing?verb=getExamples&amp;elementName=head&amp;namespace=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.tei-c.org%2Fns%2F1.0">link (XML)</a>
                        </li>
              <li>
                            <a href="http://mapoflondon.uvic.ca/codesharing.htm?verb=getExamples&amp;elementName=head&amp;namespace=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.tei-c.org%2Fns%2F1.0">link (HTML)</a>
                        </li>
            </ul>
          </li>
          <li>
                    <strong>Get examples of TEI <code>@style</code> attributes, on any element:</strong>
            <pre>
    verb=getExamples
    attributeName=style
    namespace=http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0</pre>
            <ul>
              <li>
                            <a href="http://mapoflondon.uvic.ca/codesharing?verb=getExamples&amp;attributeName=style&amp;namespace=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.tei-c.org%2Fns%2F1.0">link (XML)</a>
                        </li>
              <li>
                            <a href="http://mapoflondon.uvic.ca/codesharing.htm?verb=getExamples&amp;attributeName=style&amp;namespace=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.tei-c.org%2Fns%2F1.0">link (HTML)</a>
                        </li>
            </ul>
          </li>
          <li>
                    <strong>Get examples of TEI <code>@style</code> attributes appearing on the <code>&lt;hi&gt;</code> element, and return them in the context of their parent element:</strong>
            <pre>
    verb=getExamples
    elementName=hi
    attributeName=style
    wrapped=true
    namespace=http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0</pre>
            <ul>
              <li>
                            <a href="http://mapoflondon.uvic.ca/codesharing?verb=getExamples&amp;elementName=hi&amp;attributeName=style&amp;wrapped=true&amp;namespace=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.tei-c.org%2Fns%2F1.0">link (XML)</a>
                        </li>
              <li>
                            <a href="http://mapoflondon.uvic.ca/codesharing.htm?verb=getExamples&amp;elementName=hi&amp;attributeName=style&amp;wrapped=true&amp;namespace=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.tei-c.org%2Fns%2F1.0">link (HTML)</a>
                        </li>
            </ul>
          </li>
        </ol>
        
      </section>
      
      <section id="futureDevelopment">
        <header>
                <h2>Future development</h2>
            </header>
        <p>The following features are under consideration for a future version of this protocol:</p>
        
          <section id="responseCompression">
                <header>
                    <h3>Response compression</h3>
                </header>
            
          <p>The OAI-PMH protocol, which is a strong influence on this one, includes the option for the server 
          to supply a response to the querying harvester in a 
            <a href="http://www.openarchives.org/OAI/openarchivesprotocol.html#ResponseCompression">compressed format</a>. 
            Where large quantities of XML data are being harvested, this might be a useful feature.</p>
            </section>
        
          <section id="xpathQueries">
                <header>
                    <h3>XPath queries</h3>
                </header>
            
          <p>This protocol is designed to be as simple as possible, so that it can easily be implemented and understood both 
          by implementers and users. However, sophisticated users who are familiar with XPath and XQuery are likely to 
          find its limitations frustrating. One obvious way to expand the protocol is to allow querying of the data using 
          XPath and/or XQuery. This presents potential issues of security and input-sanitization, so it would need some 
          careful thought; an XPath query could easily construct a single response element that includes the entire collection 
          that is being queried, bringing the responding server to its knees, and an XQuery could modify or delete data if 
          permissions are not correctly configured.</p>
            </section>
        
        <section id="exampleSource">
                <header>
                    <h3>Source document information for examples</h3>
                </header>
          <p>It would be useful if information about the source document from which an example is taken could be provided
            along with the example. This might be supplied as a URI in the <code>@source</code> attribute on the
            <code>&lt;egXML&gt;</code> element. This would have to be optional, since many repositories do not provide
            access to their XML source code as a matter of course, and may choose to implement the CodeSharing API
            in a manner that excludes some components of their documents.
          </p>
        
        </section>
        
          <section id="exampleIdentifiers">
                <header>
                    <h3>Identifiers for examples</h3>
                </header>
          <p>Other than providing the option to "wrap" a target element in its parent, the current version of the protocol provides no
          contextual information about any element in the response. It might be useful if there were a method of specifying a stable
          identifier for any result element, which could be expressed as an attribute on the containing &lt;egXML&gt; element. However,
          it is by no means clear that any such identifier could be stable in the long-term, given that collections change and data is 
          edited, and there is no current use-case for any such identifier.</p>
          </section>
        
      </section>
    </body>
</html>